Task 1a) Aside from the already implemented visual variables (position, size & color hue) in Figure 1, what are two further visual variables that could be used to encode more information in the scatterplot? Give two examples on which data dimension could be encoded by which visual variable.

Task 1a) Answer
Shape for sex
Texture for species


Task 1b) Which problems could arise in Figure 1 when using size to encode 
i) "body_mass_g"? 
ii) "sex"? 

Task 1b) Answer
i) Due to the variable domain (which is very high) it may be difficult to interpret differences between data points. The differences are rather small, and it is very hard to get an actual understanding of how big the differences are.
ii) Differences in size for gender could be ordered by the viewer, since size is one of the visual variables which values are spontaneously ordered by humans. Would be more fitting to select a variable for which all factors have the same visibility. Also, gender is a binary variable, whereas size is better used for a continous variable.

Task 1c) Explain the principle of pre-attentive processing and its relevance in selecting appropriate visual variables for effective data communication. 

Task 1c) Answer
Pre-attentive processing refers to those visual properties that are percieved very rapidly and accurately by humans (less than 200 to 250 milliseconds). Being aware of which features are processed this way helps to decide how to encode the most important information in the visualization. At the same time, conjunctions that inhibit pre-attentive recognition should be avoided. It should be noted that some features are asymmetric and therefore similar dispositions may not have the same impact on the viewer.

Task 1d) Argue which Gestalt Law(s) contribute most to the perception of clusters in Figure 1? Set them in relationship to the implemented visual variables (position, size & color hue).

Task 1d) Answer
Proximity: data points that are nearby in their position as usually grouped
Similarity: in color and size, create the impression of grouping of data points
Continuity: data points away from the cluster centroid (no so similar position) but situated adjacent to points in the perisphery of the cluster may be perceived as part of the same cluster, mostly if these are in the same color.
